16-02-2025

1) What is SQL?
    SQL (Structured Query Language) is a standard programming language used to communicate with relational databases. 
    It allows users to create, read, update, and delete data, and provides commands to define database schema and manage database security

2) What is a database?
    A database is an organized collection of data that is stored and managed electronically, 
    typically in a structured format, to allow easy access, management, and updating. 
    It is designed to handle large volumes of data efficiently and can be used by individuals, applications, or organizations.

3) What is a primary key?
    A primary key is a unique identifier for a row (or record) in a database table. 
    It ensures that each record in the table is uniquely identifiable and cannot contain duplicate or null values.

4) What is a foreign key?
    A foreign key is a column (or a set of columns) in a database table that establishes a relationship between two tables. 
    It refers to the primary key in another table, creating a link between the two tables and enforcing referential integrity.

5) What is constraints in database ?
    In a database, constraints are rules or restrictions applied to columns in a table to enforce data integrity, accuracy, and reliability. 
    They ensure that the data entered into the table adheres to specific rules, such as preventing duplicates or disallowing null values. 
    Constraints help maintain consistency and avoid invalid or inconsistent data in the database.


6) What is normalization in databases?

    Normalization in databases is the process of organizing data into structured tables to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity. 
    It involves breaking down a large table into smaller, more manageable tables and defining relationships between them using primary and foreign keys.

    The primary goal of normalization is to minimize data duplication, avoid anomalies (insert, update, and delete anomalies), and ensure efficient data storage.


7) What is denormalization, and when is it used?
    Denormalization is the process of intentionally introducing redundancy into a database design to improve query performance. 
    It involves combining tables or adding redundant data to reduce the need for complex joins and improve data retrieval speed

8) What is a query in SQL?
    A query is a SQL statement used to retrieve, update, or manipulate data in a database.

9) What are the different operators available in SQL?

    Arithmetic Operators: +, -, *, /, %
    Comparison Operators: =, !=, <>, >, <, >=, <=
    Logical Operators: AND, OR, NOT
    Set Operators: UNION, INTERSECT, EXCEPT
    Special Operators: BETWEEN, IN, LIKE, IS NULL


10) What is a view in SQL?
    A view in SQL is a virtual table that is created based on a query. 
    It doesn’t store data physically but dynamically pulls data from one or more tables whenever it is accessed. 
    Views are often used to simplify complex queries or provide an abstraction layer for users.

11) Different types of SQL cammends ? 
    Ref: img/sql-languages.png
    -DDL    -TCL
    -DQL
    -DCL
    -DML
    ✅ 1. DDL (Data Definition Language): 
        Used to define, create, and manage database schema and structures.

    ✅ 2. DQL (Data Query Language): 
        Focused specifically on querying data.

    ✅ 3. DCL (Data Control Language): 
        Used to control access to data in the database

    ✅ 4. DML (Data Manipulation Language): 
        Used for managing data within tables (inserting, updating, deleting, and retrieving).

    ✅ 5. TCL (Transaction Control Language): 
        Used to manage transactions and ensure data consistency.
    
13) What are aggregate functions in SQL?
    In SQL, aggregate functions are built-in functions used to perform calculations on multiple rows of a table and return a single value. 
    They are commonly used in conjunction with the GROUP BY clause to summarize or group data.
    Eg: SUM() - Sum of all values,  
        AVG() - Finding the average, 
        MAX() - Retrun highest value of the column , 
        MIN() - Retrun lowest value of the column 

14)  What is a subquery?
    A subquery in SQL is a query nested inside another SQL query. 
    It is often referred to as an inner query, and the query that contains it is called the outer query. 
    Subqueries are used to perform intermediate operations and pass their results to the outer query.

    Placement: Subqueries can be used in various clauses, such as:
        SELECT
        FROM
        WHERE
        HAVING

    Correlated Subquery:
        Refers to columns in the outer query, meaning the subquery is executed repeatedly for each row of the outer query.

        eg:
        SELECT name, salary 
        FROM Employees E1
        WHERE salary > (SELECT AVG(salary) FROM Employees E2 WHERE E1.department_id = E2.department_id);

    Scalar Subquery:
        Returns exactly one value (one row and one column).
        Commonly used in SELECT or comparison conditions.  

        eg:
        SELECT name, 
       (SELECT MAX(salary) FROM Employees) AS highest_salary 
        FROM Employees;




15) types of clasues in SQL
    In SQL, clauses are keywords used to define the structure and behavior of an SQL query. 
    They determine what data to retrieve, filter, group, or manipulate from the database.
    Clauses are building blocks of SQL queries and are used in specific contexts within 
    SELECT - Retrive data from tables
    INSERT - insert new data into the table
    UPDATE - Update the existing data from table
    DELETE - Delete data from table
    FROM   - accessing table 


16) What is the difference between the WHERE and HAVING clauses?
    Ref: img/where-vs-having.png

17) What are indexes, and why are they used?
    An index in SQL is a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table. 
    It is like a "lookup table" that allows the database to find rows more quickly without scanning the entire table.

    Types of index:
        - Clusterd Index - (Cluster & Non-cluster)
        - Unique Index - Only for unique fields
        - Composite Index - Create index for multiple column with sames index name (for fast multiple column search)
        - Full text Index - For advance text based search
        - Spatial Index - Geograph data

18) What is the difference between DELETE and TRUNCATE commands?
    Ref: img/delete-vs-rollback.png

19) What are the differences between SQL and NoSQL databases?
    Ref: img/sql-nosql.png

20) What is a table in SQL?
    A table in SQL is a structured collection of related data, organized into rows and columns, that resides within a database. 
    It is the fundamental building block for storing and managing data in a relational database.



21) What are NULL values in SQL?

    NULL represents a missing or unknown value. It is different from zero or an empty string. 
    NULL values indicate that the data is not available or applicable.

22)  What is a stored procedure?
    A stored procedure is a precompiled collection of one or more SQL statements that are stored and executed on the database server. 
    It allows you to encapsulate complex logic and repetitive tasks, making them reusable and more efficient.   

    Key Features of a Stored Procedure:
        Reusable:       Once created, it can be executed multiple times without rewriting the SQL statements.
        Precompiled:    Stored procedures are precompiled and stored in the database, 
                        leading to better performance since they don’t need to be parsed and optimized every time they are run.
        Parameterized:  Stored procedures can accept input parameters, return output parameters, or both, enabling dynamic execution.
        Encapsulation:  Complex business logic and operations can be encapsulated in a single procedure, simplifying application code.
        Security:       Permissions can be granted for executing a stored procedure without granting direct access to the underlying tables.


Query updation
update Shippings as s
set status = 'Dispatched'
where s.customer in (
  select c.customer_id 
  from Customers as c
  left join Orders as o on o.customer_id = c.customer_id
  group by c.customer_id 
  having count(o.customer_id) <= 1
)

